racism most likely
you clicked on this video one way or
another to hear me talk about
the politics and culture of racism
but that's not the problem here the
problem is the difference between
numeracy and innumeracy
numbers are cultural symbols
this is very alien but very obvious
fact it seems strange to us to say that
let's say it again
numbers are cultural symbols
if you have two men who are both very
skilled
optometrists they can summarize
the way in which your vision is
distorted in just two or three numbers
those numbers really mean something to
them and they really
understand what's represented by those
numbers
in a physical sense in terms of the
shape
of the lens of your eye and in a much
more complex sense in terms the way in
which
light passes through that lens the way
in which it's reflected shape distorted
the way in which
the nervous system within your eye
receives that light and turns into an
image
in the very complicated way in which a
pane of glass
can interrupt and adjust that light to
improve your vision
it all comes down to just a few
numbers on a page a few symbols but
if i'm looking at those numbers i don't
really know
what they mean what's going on
with the revival of the race and iq
debate
by charles murray what's going on
frankly
with the revival of this particular form
of scientific racism
is in principle built upon
innumeracy a failure to understand
really what numbers mean what they
represent
how to think about them especially in
the domain
of social science statistics i think
you're onto something
but i i gotta come back to ground zero
charles do you think black people are
inferior genetically
no okay well i'm laughing
i'm laughing because that's such a silly
question tell me why it's a silly
question because that's a question that
a lot of people are going to be asking
me
when they ask me why did you have that
guy on he thinks black people are
inferior
okay shall i unpack my answer a little
bit
sure okay
are there genetic differences
among people who self-identify as
different ethnicities
yes the chances that different groups
that are separated geographically
would have evolved exactly the same is
about the same as the chance of dropping
a handful of
silver dollars and they all land on
their edge you know that's just not the
way it works if you have
geographic boundaries if you have uh
other kinds of boundaries and you're
talking about
tens of thousands of years uh there
is a lot of room for evolution to have
taken place
and i will say point number one is it's
it's
certainly true and we already know it's
true that there are lots of uh
population differences in in various
genetic variants
that is not a controversial statement
among geneticists
so yes you have you have differences
between groups
they do not determine your fate they
they don't lend themselves to
superiority inferiority
because they're bundles uh if you're
going to use the word
inferior and superior then whites better
get used to the idea that they're
inferior east asians
but here's where the importance of
differences within that top percentile
have so much impact on life outcomes
i use the example in the book
because you say to yourself suppose
you're at the 99th percentile of iq
what difference does it really make if
you're at the 99.5
and the analogy i use is uh is in sports
of a male basketball at a building yeah
well you know what if you just have a
measure of male basketball ability
probably every starter on every college
basketball team in a major school in the
country
is in the 99th percentile so is lebron
james
well you know what there is a huge
difference within that top percentile
and the same is
also true somebody that 99th percentile
of iq is a smart person
somebody at the 99.9 can do things
that the person at the 99th percentile
captain and so
it's a very small chunk of the
population
but if you're looking at who is on the
staffs of the quantitative hedge funds
in new york city making zillions of
dollars
they are overwhelmingly of people who
are out at the 99.9
percentile and that being the case given
the differences in cognitive ability
that means they are asians and they are
whites overwhelming
well a lot of them are jewish charles
and a lot of them are jewish
[Music]
have you ever heard someone tell you
that
bob dylan is a genius
for some younger people in the audience
or maybe by some viewers who
grew up in some other part of the world
where bob dylan is not a famous name
you could replace the name bob dylan
with almost any
famous musician any famous recording
artist with a series of
top 10 hits on the radio have you ever
heard someone say
that bob dylan is a genius
have you ever watched a 30 minute
interview with bob dylan
i'm gonna suggest you that bob dylan
is not a genius he is not a person
of extraordinary intelligence by any
meaningful measure whatsoever you just
heard charles murray
suggests to you as a self-evident
fact that successful
hedge fund managers this is
this is basically a way to play the
stock market this is basically being a
stock broker
within that field a more specific role a
hedge fund manager
he referred to it as a self evident
fact that hedge fund managers
are people of extraordinary intelligence
that they're not in the top one percent
but that they're in the top
one-tenth of one percent that they are
superior
to the rest of us in intelligence in the
same way that the absolute greatest
basketball player in the world
towers over his competition
have you ever watched a 30-minute
interview
with a hedge fund manager serious
question
you can do it right now on youtube you
can go to a podcast you can hear a three
hour interview
with a successful hedge fund manager and
he talks to you about what he did in
high school
and he talks to you how he met his first
wife and how he cheated on her with a
stripper
and how he got divorced and how he
became a cocaine addict and how he used
to be a star trek fan
and the more you listen to any any
successful
hedge fund manager talk about their life
you are going to think
this person is not a genius in the same
way that you look at bob dylan
after you get to know the guy after
you've heard him talk about his divorce
and his cocaine habit and what he did in
high school in his whole life
as well you heard him talking to down
right away you'll start to realize gee
what people perceive as genius
in the case of bob dylan is really just
a certain set of skills
developed to a very high level of
competence
and in the whole rest of this guy's life
there may be
many areas of knowledge many areas of
expertise
many meaningful measures of intelligence
in which he is average or mediocre
or even really quite stupid
have you ever heard a hedge fund manager
talk about politics
i have have you ever heard a
famous musician like bob dylan
like britney spears like little wayne
talk about politics i have i've heard
many hours of both
i used to listen to lectures from the
london school of economics that they
upload
i didn't go there in person i just mean
they upload lectures to the internet and
i've
i've heard people from all these walks
in live life and more
talk about politics you know what the
tragedy is guess who the most
influential people in the world are
in politics multi-millionaire hedge fund
managers
and famous musicians like bob dylan and
britney spears this kind of
celebrity and in an area like
politics we see the extent to which
they stand on feet of clay
all right what everyone wants to talk
about
is racism in the year 2021
we have just sentenced the police
officer derek chauvin
to prison the man who killed george
floyd
the flames of the riots that were
inspired by the death of george floyd
have been doused out and cities are
being rebuilt coast-to-coast the united
states
statues continue to be torn down here in
canada
as canada reflects on its own history of
uh
slavery racism and genocide
there's never been a better time to
publish a book
that's fundamentally race-baiting that's
fundamentally playing to
public fascination with precisely these
kinds of questions and that suggests to
the audience
a profoundly appealing myth of
meritocracy
that the reason why bob dylan had hit
songs the reason why he became so good
not at playing his guitar no nobody
would say bob dylan is extraordinarily
good at playing his guitar
no one would say is extraordinarily good
at playing the harmonica
nobody he was good
at interpreting the cultural trends that
were going on
around him in greenwich village new york
city
and in making the kind of song
people wanted to hear right and there's
a kind of intelligence there
but there's also a complex bundle
of cultural presuppositions
there are very palpable reasons why
an immigrant who had just arrived from
japan
in greenwich village in new york city
would be at a tremendous disadvantage
compared to bob dylan at interpreting
those cultural signals
and putting together a hit album a hit
song
there are very palpable reasons why
a newly arrived african immigrant
someone who just flew over from ghana
let's say
to new york city wouldn't be able to
interpret those cultural signals
and come up with a new style of music
and hit
albums on the airwaves and the reason
has nothing to do with the type of
intelligence
measured by iq and it has nothing to do
with
any property that is genetic
if we're talking about the differences
between people
in the top ten percent and you've heard
that charles murray with his new
thesis is focusing on the top one
percent
and the top one tenth of one percent if
we're talking at the bottom of the
spectrum
which is really where a lot of the
debate about public policy needs to be
directed then we'll talk about a whole
different set of issues well if you're
blind
you have a huge disadvantage if you're
dyslexic
you have a huge disadvantage if you grew
up
with lead poisoning because in your
neighborhood there were
lead pipes or pipes with lead soldering
lead welding
around the edges you're at a huge
disadvantage oh you didn't you didn't
know that
lead poisoning in your water especially
as you grow up
lowers your iq oh in the united states
of america
do you think that's distributed equally
between white people
and black people oh you didn't know that
oh
black people in the united states of
america have a much higher
rate of lead poisoning and reduced iq
due to lead poisoning you want to know
someone else
who grew up with lead poisoning in his
drinking water
me my neighborhood where i grew up in
toronto
all the water i drank out of the tap and
every day my parents took that frozen
canned orange juice that nobody drinks
anymore
mixed it up with tap water i had lead
poisoning
impair my mental development as a child
and we'll never know
how intelligent i might have been if the
government of canada
if the government of the city of toronto
had just given a damn and installed the
pipes properly if i hadn't grown up with
that
disadvantage we don't know
at the low end when you're looking at
the bottom
10 percent when you're looking at the
characteristics that cause people to
fail an iq test to be
incapable of writing an iq test at all
that cause people to be incapable of
going to university at all incapable of
doing math and capable
of reading and capable of learning to
play a musical instrument
there are factors there that profoundly
skew the significance of
averages of average numbers and what
those average numbers
mean and when we're looking at
representations of
intelligence of educational
accomplishment and so on
in mass in masses of people in millions
and millions of people
we are looking at the very same factors
that make it
impossible for someone to get a driver's
license
impossible for someone to get and keep a
job
and then that's going to turn up in the
averages
for that population as a whole so if you
have
two different ethnic segments of the
population
and one is living in poverty and the
other isn't
one has worse access to education one
has better one has a higher rate
of alcoholism a higher rate of drug
addiction
than the other a higher rate of lead
poisoning
all of those factors are going to show
up in those statistics
but what charles murray wants us to do
is to instead
focus at the upper limit
at the extremes of what he
calls intelligence and it's in
that area precisely that this
notion of quantifying intelligence of
assigning these numbers
assigning these cultural symbols to
things then presuming
that we know what it means starts to
become
most absurd starts to become most
laughable
why was bob dylan more successful
as a musician than a hundred other
people
who were in greenwich village new york
city
at that same time trying to write songs
was it really because he was more
intelligent
was it really because he had more
intelligence
as as measured by the iq test
was it because he was jewish
what a really absurd notion
to try to reduce the accomplishment the
artistic creativity and the cultural
salience
of what bob dylan did to his ethnicity
as jewish or the relationship between
his ethnicity
and what you say iq tests measure
or proof right and by the way
what was the original idea that bob
dylan had again
oh right he imitated african-american
music
he was a white guy doing
new york city cover versions of
african-american folk music
african-american early blues music and
then he took it off
in his own direction and by the way
after that his career only went downhill
from there that was the magic of of bob
dylan
uh there are quite a few other early
white top 10 artists in american rock
and roll
about whom we could say the same thing
this is the genesis of elvis presley
it's actually imitating and co-opting
african-american culture and making it
more palatable to making it more
acceptable to
a white uh mass market audience
okay
what does it take to be successful on
the stock market
what are the characteristics what are
the advantages that make you really
successful as a stock broker
or specifically as a hedge fund manager
and how do those correlate to
intelligence
by any particular measure
all right it may seem laughable to you
oh it may seem ridiculous
for me to suggest that the cultivation
of a specialized
skill in interpreting economic
data has just as little to do
with intelligence in a meaningful sense
as cultivating the ability to look at a
bunch of black lines on a piece of
paper and in your own mind hear the
music
an idiot could do it incredibly stupid
people
learn how to read sheet music and learn
how to focus their mind and use their
creativity
to improve a composition on a sheet of
paper right
to look at a bunch of charts to look at
a bunch
of economic equations and hear that
music
it doesn't take a genius it doesn't even
take extraordinary intelligence of any
kind and if you just listen to
interviews with these guys
who are successful stock brokers and
successful head shows managers
reflecting on other things in their life
reflecting on politics reflected society
you will realize
that they are for the most part people
of below
average intelligence but who were born
into circumstances
where they had the access to education
that they needed to develop that
set of skills and were ultimately just
like bob dylan
they were lucky they were lucky in
putting together
putting together those opportunities in
a way that
a newly arrived immigrant from japan or
a newly arrived immigrant from africa
or someone who grew up in a drug dealing
infested
ghetto in los angeles would be
very unlikely to do
[Music]
maybe we can we can practice